# Maelstrom

[[Two images generated by Maelstrom runs of a transactional workload: a Lamport diagram showing
requests flowing to transaction coordinators and on to a KV store, and a serialization anomaly
consisting of dependency edges forming a cycle between transactions.]][1]

Maelstrom is a workbench for learning distributed systems by writing your own. It uses the
[Jepsen][2] testing library to test toy implementations of distributed systems. Maelstrom provides
standardized tests for things like "a commutative set" or "a transactional key-value store", and
lets you learn by writing implementations which those test suites can exercise. It's used as a part
of a distributed systems workshop by [Jepsen][3].

Maelstrom provides a [range of tests][4] for different kinds of distributed systems, built on top of
a [simple JSON protocol][5] via STDIN and STDOUT. Users write servers [in any language][6].
Maelstrom runs those servers, sends them requests, routes messages via a simulated network, and
checks that clients observe expected behavior. You want to write Plumtree in Bash? Byzantine Paxos
in Intercal? Maelstrom is for you.

Maelstrom's tooling lets users experiment with [simulated latency][7] and [message loss][8]. Every
test includes [timeline visualizations][9] of concurrency structure, [statistics][10] on messages
exchanged, [timeseries graphs][11] to understand how latency, availability, and throughput respond
to changing conditions, and [Lamport diagrams][12] so you can understand exactly how messages flow
through your system. Maelstrom's checkers can verify [sophisticated safety properties][13] up to
strict serializability, and generate [intuitive, minimal examples][14] of consistency anomalies.

Maelstrom can help you model how a system responds to different cluster sizes, network topologies,
latency distributions, and faults like network partitions. Maelstrom also offers [simulated
services][15] that you can use to build more complex systems.

It's built for testing toy systems, but don't let that fool you: Maelstrom is reasonably fast and
can handle simulated clusters of 25+ nodes. On a 48-way Xeon, it can use 94% of all cores, pushing
upwards of 60,000 network messages/sec.

## Documentation

The Maelstrom Guide will take you through writing several different types of distributed algorithms
using Maelstrom. We begin by setting up Maelstrom and its dependencies, write our own tiny echo
server, and move on to more sophisticated workloads.

* [Chapter 1: Getting Ready][16]
* [Chapter 2: Echo][17]
* [Chapter 3: Broadcast][18]
* [Chapter 4: CRDTs][19]
* [Chapter 5: Datomic][20]
* [Chapter 6: Raft][21]

There are also several reference documents that may be helpful:

* [Protocol][22] defines Maelstrom's "network" protocol, message structure, RPC semantics, and error
  handling.
* [Workloads][23] describes the various kinds of workloads that Maelstrom can test, and define the
  messages involved in that particular workload.
* [Understanding Test Results][24] explains how to interpret the various plots, data structures, and
  log files generated by a test.
* [Services][25] discusses Maelstrom's built-in network services, which you can use as primitives in
  building more complex systems.

## Design Overview

Maelstrom is a [Clojure][26] program which runs on the [Java Virtual Machine][27]. It uses
[Jepsen][28] to generate operations, record a history of their results, and analyze what happens.

Writing "real" distributed systems involves a lot of busywork: process management, networking, and
message serialization are complex, full of edge cases, and difficult to debug across languages. In
addition, running a full cluster of virtual machines connected by a real IP network is tricky for
many users. Maelstrom strips these problems away so you can focus on the algorithmic essentials:
process state, transitions, and messages.

The "nodes" in a Maelstrom test are plain old binaries written in any language. Nodes read "network"
messages as JSON from STDIN, write JSON "network" messages to STDOUT, and do their logging to
STDERR. Maelstrom runs those nodes as processes on your local machine, and connects them via a
simulated network. Maelstrom runs a collection of simulated network clients which make requests to
those nodes, receive responses, and records a history of those operations. At the end of a test run,
Maelstrom analyzes that history to identify safety violations.

This allows learners to write their nodes in whatever language they are most comfortable with,
without having to worry about discovery, network communication, daemonization, writing their own
distributed test harness, and so on. It also means that Maelstrom can perform sophisticated fault
injection and trace analysis.

Maelstrom starts in `maelstrom.core`, which parses CLI operations and constructs a test map. It
hands that off to Jepsen, which sets up the servers and Maelstrom services via `maelstrom.db`.
Spawning binaries and handling their IO is done in `maelstrom.process`, and Maelstrom's internal
services (e.g. `lin-kv` are defined in `maelstrom.service`. Jepsen then spawns clients depending on
the workload (`maelstrom.workload.*`) and a nemesis (`maelstrom.nemesis`) to inject faults.

Messages between nodes are routed by `maelstrom.net`, and logged in `maelstrom.journal`. Clients
send requests and parse responses via `maelstrom.client`, which also defines Maelstrom's RPC
protocol.

At the end of the test, Jepsen checks the history using a checker built in `maelstrom.core`:
workload-specific checkers are defined in their respective workload namespaces. Network statistics
are computed in `maelstrom.net.journal`, and Lamport diagrams are generated by `maelstrom.net.viz`.

`maelstrom.doc` helps generate documentation based on `maelstrom.client`'s registry of RPC types and
workloads.

## CLI Options

A full list of options is available by running `java -jar maelstrom.jar test --help`. The important
ones are:

* `--workload NAME`: What kind of workload should be run?
* `--bin SOME_BINARY`: The program you'd like Maelstrom to spawn instances of
* `--node-count NODE-NAME`: How many instances of the binary should be spawned?

To get more information, use:

* `--log-stderr`: Show STDERR output from each node in the Maelstrom log
* `--log-net-send`: Log messages as they are sent into the network
* `--log-net-recv`: Log messages as they are received by nodes

To make tests more or less aggressive, use:

* `--time-limit SECONDS`: How long to run tests for
* `--rate FLOAT`: Approximate number of requests per second
* `--concurrency INT`: Number of clients to run concurrently. Use `4n` for 4 times the number of
  nodes.
* `--latency MILLIS`: Approximate simulated network latency, during normal operations.
* `--latency-dist DIST`: What latency distribution should Maelstrom use?
* `--nemesis FAULT_TYPE`: A comma-separated list of faults to inject
* `--nemesis-interval SECONDS`: How long between nemesis operations, on average

For broadcast tests, try

* `--topology TYPE`: Controls the shape of the network topology Jepsen offers to nodes

For transactional tests, you can control transaction generation using

* `--max-txn-length INT`: The maximum number of operations per transaction
* `--key-count INT`: The number of concurrent keys to work with
* `--max-writes-per-key INT`: How many unique write operations to generate per key.

SSH options are unused; Maelstrom runs entirely on the local node.

## Troubleshooting

### Running ./maelstrom complains it's missing maelstrom.jar

You probably cloned this repository or downloaded the source and didn't compile it. Download the
compiled release tarball instead; you'll find it on the GitHub release page.

If you want to run directly from source, you'll need the [Leiningen][29] build system. Instead of
`./maelstrom ...`, run `lein run ...`.

### Raft node processes still alive after maelstrom run

You may find that node processes maelstrom starts are not terminating at the end of a run as
expected. To address this, make sure that if the process passed as `--bin` forks off a new process,
it also handles the process' termination.

#### Example

In `bin/raft`

#!/bin/bash

# Forks a new process.
java -jar target/raft.jar

In `bin/raft`

#!/bin/bash

# Replaces the shell without creating a new process.
exec java -jar target/raft.jar

## License

Copyright © 2017, 2020--2022 Kyle Kingsbury, Kit Patella, & Jepsen, LLC

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License either version 1.0 or (at your option) any later
version.

[1]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/promo.png
[2]: https://github.com/jepsen-io/jepsen
[3]: https://jepsen.io/training
[4]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/workloads.md
[5]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/protocol.md
[6]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/demo
[7]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/03-broadcast/02-performance.md
[8]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/04-crdts/01-g-set.md#a-simple-g-set
[9]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/05-datomic/not-concurrent.png
[10]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/03-broadcast/02-performance.md#how-many-messages
[11]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/06-raft/final.png
[12]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/05-datomic/missing-value.png
[13]: https://github.com/jepsen-io/elle
[14]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/05-datomic/g1-realtime.svg
[15]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/services.md
[16]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/01-getting-ready/index.md
[17]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/02-echo/index.md
[18]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/03-broadcast/index.md
[19]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/04-crdts/index.md
[20]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/05-datomic/index.md
[21]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/06-raft/index.md
[22]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/protocol.md
[23]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/workloads.md
[24]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/results.md
[25]: /jepsen-io/maelstrom/blob/main/doc/services.md
[26]: https://clojure.org/
[27]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_virtual_machine
[28]: https://github.com/jepsen-io/jepsen
[29]: https://leiningen.org
